He said there were millionaires in this country.
There were lots of guys that had over a million
dollars. That's quite common. And I couldn't
understand it, you know, because that term was
unknown. Millionaires. Just to be a millionaire
is a kind of a professional, so I might say. You
know, that was unknown. We had some rich people,
especially old families that had lots of land. and
some industrialists, but they were not referred
to as millionaires per se, like somebody can be a
millionaire and not have a job. Yes, that's true.
You know, per se, he's just a millionaire. So that
was, naturally I wanted to find out all I could
about this country, naturally. Curiosity was
tremendous. And I wasn't going to find out
anything by being shipped back or You know, nobody
was going to tell me any more than I already knew in
prison camp. So I felt that was another thing I, all
these many reasons that I gave myself for
escaping, you know, why I was doing this. I was just
agonized over it for months
and months and months. And I wanted to find what
this common sense was that, that Germans seem to
lack from WW1. Yes. Yes. I'll
tell you a funny story about, Candy has heard it so
many times. I'll tell a story where Mercury's Law,
with the chorus girls from Reno that turned out to
be, one of them turned out to be a German countess,
according to her story. And I know she was German,
but I could tell by the accent and her behavior when
she would order, when she would have dark
bread
and German bread for breakfast. Yeah. And it
was... In a sense, she did not suspect me of
anything other than that I was an American ski
instructor. But she must have sensed something
because she did like me better than the other guys.
So there was some attraction there. And
fortunately nothing, it was no danger to me
because she was, actually she moved in better
circles. She had more income than I had. I couldn't
keep up with her partying. She
could pass better. She would speak in her accent
and everybody thought it was cute. And that used to
upset me because the Austrian ski instructors
that would come over, they could speak horrible
English and the girls would just laugh and laugh
and they would think they were the cutest thing
since you know what. And I had to carefully pick my
words. I probably was considered dull because I
couldn't speak fast enough, compete with these
guys who were yodeling and, you know, they were
just turning on their charm. And I couldn't read.
It's very hard. That, I think, is difficult. You
lose your charm as a fugitive. Because you haven't
got the spontaneity that you need to be a
professor. I must have been considered dull so
many times that You know,
what is the matter
with them? Didn't you think something was going to
happen? You
were, at that point, a very confident, a super
confident person. Remember what Cheryl said?
Cheryl, my daughter, was 16 when I met all her
little girlfriends over at the summer parties.
And what she told you the other night, what she
thought, she had no idea. Yeah, they thought it was
something strange. They thought you were
strange. Yeah. But then, you know... When all the
friends would come over, they'd look at him and
they'd say, who is this guy? Where did he come from?
Where did you meet this guy? This was Palo Alto,
California. They had a short history, so it was
kind of... Usually because everybody talks at
least about their school days. See, I couldn't
even talk about my school days. But his accent at
that time was a little heavier. But very few people
called me on it, though. Very few people. Like the
guys I worked for. I worked for the Clark brothers.
They never said a word about my accent. We were even
wearing Tyrolean hats. We were still involved
those days. In the 50s. Very few people would call
me on it. And if they did, then I would really slow
down and check
my, what I said more, be more careful. I used to
correct him about his pronunciation, and then I, I
felt that I was doing, it wasn't his problem, it was
my problem, because you should not be correcting
someone's grammar, so then I just stopped doing
it, and then I didn't think about it anymore. And
now, years later, he doesn't do that, or at least .
It doesn't bother you? No. I'm absolutely
astonished at his grasp of the English language,
his range, and sometimes when he mispronounces
things, I think it's delightful. It's not . People
are very forgiving. Very forgiving.
Amazing. Like I say, these girls, the more accent
you had in those ski resorts, the better they liked
you. And here I could have had an accent and I
couldn't use it, you might say. You could have
charmed the... Yeah. So I had to play the, I don't
know
what I played,
you know, I just had to be, I didn't know. I kind of
get a clue what you're
saying, because when I was correcting you, it
really, I didn't, you know, when you're married to
somebody and they mispronounce things, that's,
you're mispronounced, you know what I mean? Yes,
yes. And so when I stopped correcting you on some
basis, I was trying to come to terms with it. the
distance between you, that you hadn't merged
somehow, is it? Or you hadn't tried? He was saying
that he was reluctant sometimes to talk, to say
things because people were thinking he was dumb. I
thought he was, is he dumb or something? Why is he
saying it that way? Is that correct? And then later
on, I realized, no, he's not young. And then I guess
I got into it. I didn't really want to press him for
fear of finding out he was something. I don't know.
We have a whole... I put it into the area of
non-importance. We'll have a whole evening when
we go through your... What did you think about
this? What did you think about that? How did you...
You're going to be on the grill. Tell me what
friends you had in the camp.
We were all non-com officers, so we had the same
rank. I think there were one or two guys left from my
school, from Heidelberg, and the rest of them. I
have some pictures of it. From Heidelberg? This
isn't the military. No, from Canberra. From
Canberra I have some pictures. Yes, but I have...
Oh, that's the rings. Yeah, and I think you've seen
those. No, but the... from Heidelberg, where were
these... Well, the one guy that was assigned to the
same unit, he may have been in the first camp, and
then we got separated. Right, but when you say
Heidelberg, you were trained in the Berlin camp.
No, Heidelberg, never got to the Berlin... Oh, so
you weren't at the Berlin Academy. No, never got
there. That was the final one. But there were, I
remember one or two that I was close with that are in
these pictures and that came back, the memory came
back. One of them was an artist, a very talented
young man. He drew, did watercolors, did a lot of
graphics that we all knew would hang on the wall and
give away some journal proper. He did it in that
same graphic, that old English thing that I do.
Have you got those pictures? Maybe we can jar your
memory while we're talking about the canvas.
My
mother
said
that to me once when I wrote a book once and
dedicated it to my mother. Anyway, I remember my
mother remarking to me once that this proved that
she was here. Oh. Some of it you know.
This one. Yes. Let me show you some . This is a letter
I wrote to my parents. Not that. I have a copy of it.
You have that? Yes. Yes. Now
this, I think, is the original one that my Wanda
poster is made of. Take a look at it. It sure is.
Oh, they have got this.
This one is where I learned to ski. There's a little
ski hut outside of Schwedens that belonged to the
local merchants. And I'm demonstrating the shoes
position that my teachers... To your teachers?
Oh, I see. They were teaching you. Yes. And race.
Here's a hut. Here's a...
So you were trained as a surveyor during the...
Yeah. I would pick up these things. Whatever they
taught me, I would learn. Anything that I kept, I
was probably one of those fast learners. But I
wouldn't necessarily keep it forever. But if
there was a contest, you teach me something and
then you say, okay, now who's going to be the
fastest? You know, chances are it was first or
second. Now this wasn't in Heidelberg, was it? No,
this was, I'll show you, I have all the cities. Oh,
okay. This is in Schwedens, that's the tennis
side, I'm just going through my sports thing. This
is our country club, court number one. This is
Horst Trispel on the right, the one that decorated
soldier and captain. young upcoming, he would
have made it in politics or in the military either
way. One of my favorites. He was one of those
talented guys that you run across most likely to
succeed. Flashing smile. He could have made it in
Hollywood. He was good looking, laugh, outgoing,
laughed, loved everybody, that type of thing. He
was promoted to Hauptmann before Before I even got
in, I think. Yes. Do you think he survived the war? I
kind of doubt it, but you never know. It surprised
me. My whole family survived it. Because they, you
know, just never know. But, you know, guys like
him, I don't know. It's hard to say. He was one of
those elite, most advanced troops, motorized.
The big guns, bigger than anything that I was
involved in.
Now this is a train that they, you can see we have the
African Unicorn on it. We were shipped by these
cattle cars with straw on the floor. Believe me,
it's hard to sleep in those things. Of course, the
day is on end on these cattle cars. But I did get to
see Yugoslavia and some of those countries. I just
thought it was pretty cool. On your way down to
Greece. Yeah, on my way down to Greece. Now where
were these pictures kept? These were in the hands
of your sister. Yeah, and my nieces got it. My
sister, yeah. And here's what I think is the gypsy
that told me I was going to take a long, long trip.
Well, it was pretty safe considering that you're
on your way to Africa. But I said Africa, and she
says, no, they're all very mysterious. We got our
money's worth.
And here's some You were asking me, I was going to
ask you a question about my body. The guy on the
right, he was in camp with me, in several camps with
me. He was in my outfit in Africa. I do remember he
had one thumb missing, one finger missing. And he
had a lot of acne scars. And he was very exact, a very
reserved kind of person. But a nice, real nice guy.
He's still in the back.
This is a, as a student, he said knickerbockers.
Oh, yes, yes, knickers. They were Australian
wool, beautiful knickers. I don't know where he
found that stuff. He was traveling, you know, he
went to Breslau, the capital, and so he saw a lot
more and he moved around a lot more than most people
because of his job. He's the artist, but he was a
knickerbocker. Oh, I see.
Very
talented artist. What was his name again? .
My mother and father raised my sister's two girls.
So they had another family, so to speak. Because my
sister stayed behind in Twightness for some
reason, unbeknownst to me. It's in her letter.
Pardon? It's in her letter. Why she stayed there?
She worked on the farm. And she gave up her two
children to your parents? Yes, to get him over the
border. Somehow they didn't get her out for some
reason. What happened to Herbert? Herbert got
out. So they all left your sister? I believe so.
That's the impression I got, that Herbert got out
first, and then my sister got out last. But
according to the girl, well, according to
Rosalita, the woman we met, I suppose. Who's
Rosalita? She's the youngest, his youngest
niece. All right, of these two that your parents
raised. Yeah. That the two girls were smuggled out
by, I have
pictures of them. with the two babies. My mother
here, she's got these two little children. And my
father had already had a serious accident on his
job. He was run over by one of his freight cars and
broke his upper thigh. And one leg was shorter than
the other slightly. There was when I was still On
the run. I was just a student. I remember visiting
him in the hospital. So he was put into the labor, on
a labor crew. My father was put on the labor crew, on
the railroad, you know, the labor gang that goes
out and checks the ties when he was probably 16
years old. Somehow he escaped to the west side and
got his old job back as a headmaster. Oh, it was the
Russians that put him on the labor crew. Yeah. Got
it. The Russians put him on the labor crews. But I
don't know. I don't know the details of his escape.
But once he got out, then he managed to get my mother
and everybody else, two nieces out, and last, my
sister. And I knew he was the only one that could do
it. A guy like me, my age, you go into the nearest
labor camp, no matter what. Absolutely. What's
your story is, you know? Older guys, he was
probably old enough that they let him go. And
young, old women, they were okay, you know. But
guys, army age, it's just... You know, right to a
labor. Yeah. Let me ask you about the, we've gone
through the camps, just shifted from camp to camp
in a routine way. How did you find out when it was
time to be shifted to another camp? Did rumors go
through the camp, or all of a sudden they blew the
whistles and everyone said, line up, get your
stuff, we're moving to another place? It was
announced, it was posted, I believe. Only certain
people went? Yeah, it was always a selective
process, which we never could figure out what it
was. We didn't seem to, I mean, we felt that it could
be something else. oh yes i just wondered if we
never even thought about it much this i only found
out later that there was some rhyme or reason
behind it there were some big decisions being made
somewhere else but we just thought it was routine
because it's probably a good idea not to let him get
too too too familiar with the with the area yes i
think that's what i thought did you um And as soon as
you moved to a new camp, you immediately made
another camp translator? Usually it turned out
that way, in most cases, because, like I say, very
few people spoke as well as I did. Yes, I can see. I
mean, they always had somebody who could speak a
little English, but they didn't have the command
that I had, so they always took me in. Even if they
had another translator, they'd say, come on
along, you know, just in case.
And then gave me the job of translating those
people articles. And the Wehrmacht, their daily
news bulletin or something, the battles and
various fronts and all that. And you were never
accused of being pro-American, anti-American,
pro-Nazi, anti? I don't know. I'm not sure about
that, to be honest with you. I'm not sure, because I
don't know. There were some, a lot of things were
going on, and there were some rumors, but nothing
was really personal that I know of. And I just kind
of tried to stay out of this when it got political,
this area. We left these guys alone, these hard
Nazi guys. And they stayed too. I was in my camps.
Did you have anybody in the camps from the 999th
penal battalion that was with the Africa Corps? It
was the 999. What was that? They were some
special... It was a penal, a disciplinary
battalion attached to the Africa Corps. And many
of them were anti-Nazis, many of them were
criminals, many of them were, you know, they
formed a unit called the 999.
When you got to Lawrenceburg, did you ever
participate on the camp newspaper, Lagosaito, or
anything like that? Well, I did the translation,
but uh and read the paper but i don't i don't publish
anything no because the every campaign usually
had a newspaper yeah i remember publishing one
story once and they wanted more but i didn't know
anymore it was the story about the okay guy where
the where the origin of okay came from and i don't
know where i read that but it's supposed to came
from come from Otto Krause or something. He signed
his cars that way in Detroit. And there was
supposed to be a sign that was a good car or
something. And they, naturally, they camped.
They all thought there was a great story. Oh, yes,
that is good. If you have more, I thought that's the
only one I had. But I've heard different stories
ever since. That sounds good. Otto Krause. Otto
Krause. Krause, I think. Krause. The war is over.
How did the other prisoners react to the end of the
war? April, May 1st, May 2nd, May 3rd.
Everybody kept to themselves. It was a shell
shock.
But they knew the war had been going badly.
Couldn't have been it. It wasn't, well, some of
them, they wouldn't really, they didn't want to
leave. They couldn't leave because things must
have changed really fast, like from the time I
left, which wasn't all that long, and it was
absolute quiet. There were no battles ranging
when I left. Right. In Germany, probably. In
Germany, or even anywhere else. No, it's true. We
didn't hit the beaches until 44. See, it was all in a
relatively short time. There were no big battles
that Stalingrad had after those battles.
They couldn't believe it.
Did you ever meet anybody inside the camps that
were involved in concentration camps or things
like that? Just
military personnel?
Never. I would think they were special units, like
the SS or something. But these are strictly...
Military personnel. Military, army, kind of...
If anything, we had a mixture of career. Army guys,
officers, and I'd say 20% or so, 23% were career.
Oh, I see. I see. And they were, you know, they were
maybe stubborn and very proud type, patriotic
type, because they were trained to be that way,
because they were a regular army.
But other than that, nothing in the concentration
camps. The stories, we didn't, I'm trying to think
when I heard, the stories about concentration
camps, first
time in which camp it would be even if it wasn't. It
might have been afterwards. They came out
relatively late. But the relationship between
the guards
and officers, the American officers and the other
persons got worse from camp to camp. started
all on
beautiful and then they were walking around with
real strange expressions on their faces
you know for us because we didn't know what and then
But
I don't remember hearing any of these
concentration stories of especially killings.
To me, a concentration camp might have been a
translation of any camp that has a bar choir around
it, where you concentrate people. That would be my
translation of a concentration camp, at least. In
the German dictionary, there wouldn't be any word
other than concentrating people. That's where it
comes from. So I figured a prison camp of people.
And perhaps the guards knew more than the
prisoners did, and it showed in their
expressions. Yeah. Yeah, it did show.
But I knew there was something like that going on. I
could read. I had enough sensitivity in those
days, and that served me well later on, because I
do... know when people are upset about something.
I can read their faces and make them feel
insensitive too. So that everyone was depressed,
the end of the war had come, everybody's trying to
make plans to figure out what the rumors are,
what's going to happen to you. Food was great. I had
read, having access to newspapers, that we were
all going to be sent
back to our homeland, wherever we came from.
But in my case, there was no place to go. There was no
homeland left. And if they made good at sending me
back where I came from, I was in real trouble. Go
back to the Soviet zone. Yeah. since I had no
attorney or anybody to clarify this thing,
because I was probably one of the few from that
area. Most of them were from the main part of
Germany, you know, like a big city, and they had no
problem, and they had no quarrel. No, it's not.
Is it still a heart founder for you? Yeah, just
briefly when you said it. Did you notice this went
upside down? Yes, very good. Oh, they better do
that. As I was chatting with Candy,
one of the motivations, very strong ones, among
the many motivations, it's not just anyone,
didn't want to be sent back not only to someplace
where somebody else decided to send me back to. And
it was worth taking a risk because I'd followed
orders long enough and this is all over and this is
pow. So I felt there was no need to continue this
same kind of thing. I thought, you know, this is
enough. And I'm going to go, even if I... rot in some
jungle in South America because my original plan
was to go to South America somehow. I had no idea
what it was. But I had no idea. I figured I was going
to make cigarette cases out of would sell them to
somebody for something some artisan
but i certainly didn't want anyone to tell me where
to go and it was worth taking a big risk getting shot
or whatever had there been any escapes from your
camp until then uh there had been escapes from
camps that i was in i don't know which one it was And
we could hear gunfire quite often, once a month or
so. There were some gunfires that sometimes
prisoners would get killed. And we would be told we
were either trying to escape or we touched the
wire. Now, there were tensions sometimes to the
point we were told that we would be shot if we just
touched the wire, say, or something like that. So
there was enough to... And you'd hear some... five
or six shots.
But never, you know, we never got any details. I
figured it's tough. Maybe I was a little more
calloused, because I just felt some of these
things. I'd read enough about the Russian prison
camps of WWI, so nothing really, which were, were
nothing like that. So when you escaped, you were
reasonably sure that they would shoot at you. Oh,
absolutely. So you're taking a big chance. Oh,
yeah. In those days, Turkey and, you know, there
was nothing much friendly, weaponizing going on.
And I'm sure they had, you know, they were sitting
up there with their machine guns and their big,
those big searchlights were going all night long.
You know, that was the chance it took, so. But,
uh... I just did not want anybody to tell me where to
go. Even to this day, when I agonized every once in a
while, you know, should I turn myself in? Why am I
keeping on the ground? Well, because if I turn
myself in, I'm going to have to fill out forms, and
they're going to put me in a holding cell, and
they're going to leave me in there for X number of
days and nights, and they're going to, then
somebody's going to tell me and give me a ticket or
not a ticket, tell me where to go. some Timbuktu.
Why would I? I'm perfectly happy where I am, even if
I'm a fruit picker. I'd rather be a fruit picker
than be told where to go. And especially when I,
being out west of the mansion to Kandy, that is
something that's understood, that you just, your
simple freedom, you don't ask for much, just leave
me alone, don't tell me where to go to, what to do. I
don't mind doing my whatever work I have to do. And
so that's very American. Yes. Yes, it is. Very
pioneer. So it wasn't, here I was, you know, I had a
kinship with the American West, you know. Yes. And
I felt good about it. Oh, I read everything about
the American West. Did you read Carl May stories,
Old Shatterhand? Yes, yes, all these old stories.
Old Winnetou. And The one at the Heralds Club in
Reno, he had just opened up and the gambling
started, I guess, in those days. And he had put in
these 24 by 20 white glass panes, opaque, that
somebody had painted a picture on of the Old West
with a story, handwritten on it. And they were
everywhere at the Herald's Club. Two stories or
three stories high. I had no money to gamble. I had
only pennies in my pocket. I would read these
things. Everybody else was gambling. I spent
hours. I read the Old West. I hope he kept those. I
haven't been back. I think they're probably
remodeled. But those paintings on those glass
panes, I wished I could see them again. I wished
somebody put them in a museum and charged money.
They were priceless. The old judges, the outlaws,
the shootings, the immigrants, the Indians, the
whole bit. And the artist was good. So you were
drawn in by the Old West. Oh, I just loved it. Maybe
the old Carl Myh stories or the old Winnetou and
Shatterhand. The Old West was very, I felt a
kinship to that spirit. So I felt I wasn't that far
off the track with what I was doing. I wasn't crazy.
No, no, no. Well, you get doubts, you know, when
you... all by yourself in some dark, miserable
room, you know, what the heck am I doing here, you
know? And the other story that struck a note with me
was in the 50s, if I did have 50 cents or 25 cents, I
used to go see these B pictures with the old
detective stories, the Raymond Chandler
stories. I'm the biggest Raymond Chandler fan
ever. Alive, yeah. And Ross McDonald. Oh, yes, I
remember. And that's about the man that is in the
middle. He doesn't belong anywhere. He doesn't
belong to the... And what is Rockford? Same thing.
He doesn't belong... He doesn't belong to the...
Police or to the criminals. And that's the way I
always felt. Kinship for that time. And it's
strange. What about the other population? How
come they feel a kinship to this kind of person?
He's a stranger. So there must be something that
people can relate to. To a person like me. Of
course. Rockford never makes any money. He works
for practically nothing. He's not a success. He
has the weirdest friends. And... And he's not
police. But he's not a criminal. Outside the law.
He breaks in, enters. He has his pick. And he's
highly popular. Yes, and he's very principled.
And he's still very principled. But he has his own
integrity. Yes. With his friends. Yes. And that's
exactly what happened. It's like Cyrano. Like
Cyrano de Bergerac. That's the way I think. He has
his own integrity. You know, everything else, my
cover in the story is terrible, but... I always
played it straight with my friends. When they find
out who I am, the only apology I have is for lying
about my cover, but not about our relationships. I
had some enemies too, and I still don't like him to
this day, but all my feelings I kept absolutely
straight. Wouldn't it be a nice feeling in six
months to write a book across the inside cover of
this book to so-and-so? Now you know. We have a lot
of apprehensions. I'm sorry, say that again?
Apprehensions about that book. Really? Not
apprehensions, really. Just... We are curious as
to what the reactions are going to be. It's just
going to flip out some of these people. My worst
apprehensions were about Jean's parents.
Because, you know, I could not see, I did not want to
embarrass them. You know, I felt that would be such
an embarrassment for middle America type people
in a small community. Although it was not half as
bad. It might not.
I don't know. They were very bigoted people.
Right, right. So they might have been reactive
then. That was an amazing thing I found. There were
lots more bigoted people in this country than I
was. So things got more and more comfortable. To be
an American is the simplest thing in the world. It
was for me. I was practically born to be an
American. Well, you're good at it. And I could talk
it, and everybody would believe me. Because I
really believed it. I could sell it. And you're
good at it. Let me ask you, as you were thinking
about breaking from the camp, see, I have to think.
Yeah, I understand. So if I keep taking you back to
these things, you're getting ready to break from
the camp. Lordsburg, you're a demi-Air Force
base, Army Air Force base in New Mexico. You have to
decide when you're going to go, what you're going
to do, what plans. You know that you're going to be
shipped to Russia or to the Soviet zone soon. The
rumors are. And by the way, just to, I don't think
that you need confirmation, but if you do, you know
that those people were shipped to the Soviet zone.
I'm glad, in a sense, I'm not glad. Because those
people who were in the Soviet, who did come to the
Soviet zone, So
what you did was exactly based on the right
information. Yeah, because I had access to the
newspapers. Because most of it, the articles,
they wouldn't be interested in the Germans. I read
the whole newspaper. They only wanted to know
about the battles and all that stuff. But I read the
whole thing. I could read between the lines.
I understood the political, you know, the
alliance, the allied, what is called the allied
alliance, probably.
So we're in the camp. It's August, moving towards
September 1945. The war is over. The war is almost
over against the Japanese. At the beginning of
September of 1945. I remember the atomic bomb. The
atomic bomb was dropped on them in August. Yeah, I
remember them standing in the hall, the mess hall.
August 6th and then August 9th. You have to make a
decision soon. Yes. You're going to leave.
September. September. I figured I agonized about
a month. Okay, so a month you worried about it. Did
you collect things that you needed to go? No, just I
had... All I needed was... a set of clothes without
the P-O-W or P-W on it. And they came back from the
laundry sometimes without anything on it. Oh,
that's good. You didn't have to take it out or
anything. Just for some reason, that paint
wouldn't stick. And it came back perfectly clean.
So all you had to do is keep one set like that. So
we're talking about a T-shirt? T-shirt and a
jacket. Some kind of thing. Fatigue. Yeah. Pants.
They were on the pants and they were everywhere. I
think we had a dark blue denim type of jacket or
shirt and a white t-shirt and a pair of pants. I
think that's what we had. All you had to do was save
the one that came back from the laundry. They had
these real powerful detergents, you know, that
take anything out. We were supposed to put it back
in, but... If you didn't, they'd hand it to you. It
was all folded up. You didn't know when you opened
it up, it had nothing in it. So now you put that away.
Yeah, you saved the set. So you're planning, do you
know where you're going to go when you get out?
Yeah, probably Peru. Oh, I mean, from here to the
next town. No, no town. You can see a town that's in
the middle of a desert. nothing but tumbleweeds,
and a mountain in the background, very much like
that. And you could see a bus, and sometimes the sun
would hit some glass or something, and
you could see something moving way, way
underneath it, tiny underneath it, on a road
there. Maybe a railroad car that looked like it,
but you couldn't really be sure. Well, I think
basically, See, to me, since they were going to
tell me where to go, all I had to do was get away from
them. Yes. Yes. It's very reasonable. First, get
away from them. Yes. Go to somebody else. Yes.
Forget them. And go from there. Had you met any
local farmers? Had you met any people in the area?
So you had no contact with anybody around there.
Did you consider taking somebody with you? No.
This was a solo effort you intended to go on.
Because I cannot stand it. Because it takes, you
know, split decisions, and I wouldn't want to
screw anybody else up, and I wouldn't want
somebody else to screw me up. So in a matter of this
importance... Right. You're bullied by
yourself. I think you do this yourself. So it's
September 21st. The sun is going down. They're
going to
a movie. I
knew there was a movie show. How many people in the
cave do you think? I like it. So I figured, you know,
while they're gone, they won't miss me for two
hours. Well, there can't be a count while they're
in the movie. They might have a count afterwards,
but they can't. And I went to the washroom. And
that's where I waited and agonized some more.
Bright lights, and I looked in the mirror. You talk
about the Welsh schmertz. It's really, really
good. I mean, I had a rock in my stomach, you know,
could hardly move. And you freeze. You're
shivering. So
you're cold. You're shivering. So I stepped
outside. Now I'm formulating a plan. You had given
no thought to, you didn't have a map? No. You didn't
know where Lordsburg was? No. Where any of the
local towns were? If I'd known where Lordsburg
were, I would have gone the other way anyway. I see.
I felt you've got to get the maximum distance
between them that we're going to send you some of
this. Maximum distance.
And here it is, the fullest moon I've ever seen in my
life. You could see, you know, for a mile, you could
see a jackrabbit.
Should I call it off? You know, I thought it was
going to be dark. This is night. See, I had not
studied the moon. That's how. But the one good
thing, and I took another look. The moon made great
shadows. In other words, you had a shadow. You had
someplace to hide.